hey guys my name is Sebastian Arab I'm
also known as the Australian strength
coach here today my gym based gym in
Australia and I'm a educator for all
things strength and I got in this
industry by accident actually when I
began as a personal trainer I saw a need
for teaching people to rehabilitate
themselves I noticed that all of my
clients that I was training had some
kind of injury so I spent a lot of my
time learning about rehabilitation and
by accident over the years I realized
that the best way to rehabilitate
somebody was to get them strong so my
focus shifted from wanting to be a
rehabilitation expert to all things
strength now I trained some of the
strongest athletes in the world I'm also
competitive power lifter at quite a high
level and the type of athletes that I've
trained come from a range of sports like
powerlifting strongman weightlifting
CrossFit fitness model rugby league MMA
and there's a lot of things that I love
about the sport that I play which is
powerlifting is the exercises that I use
in that sport squat bench press and
deadlift has a carry over to these
sports which is what I focus on but
today I'm very excited to say that I
have someone that I've been looking up
to for some time now dr. Andrew Locke
and he's highly regarded in Australia
and even the world there's one of the
best physiotherapists or rehabilitation
specialists out there and what I wanted
to do is introduce you guys to him well
he's going to introduce himself to you
and we're going to have a bit of a chat
today hopefully this spells some of the
common myths and misconceptions related
to strength training and dr. Locke
you're the man for that thank you for
coming good to catch a sebacean
thank you yeah well I am Andrew Luck a
lot of people call me doctor or
professor best just andrew well I
suppose it's just because everyone sees
that you know I've worked with a lot of
good academics over the years and it
just carries through but yeah like
yourself I'm a committed streaks
professional and to me I think we were
on the cusp of a whole new world of
rehabilitation now that is
strength-based
so you know one of the things I always
say about being a physiotherapist is
that the important thing was for me to
lose my religion oh to stop being a
physio and embrace the fact that I was
embracing science you know because
basically if you're constrained by just
your profession then you're going to
miss that the science of other
professions is also imperative to you so
I'll listen to the chiropractors
osteopaths Chinese doctors I'll listen
because there's Clues out there that
there's more for us to learn and
strength has definitely shown itself to
me is to be the way that we will fix
spines in the future and we're doing it
now
there's no laying on your back silly
Pilates reformers and things like that
that basically you see people are still
on those year after year after year
three times a week and they're still
talking about having a back problem now
our approach is you've got a back
problem mainly because you're weak and
weakness being a bad movement pattern
and a squats now deadlifts especially
we're teaching great movement patterns
these are some of the greatest
rehabilitation exercises you can do so
performance for a great athlete and
rehabilitation for the general spine
comes back too often those two movements
themselves so I'm really looking forward
to working with your technical work
because you're an elite athlete and
we'll be discussing how you move I'm
very excited for that it's something
that I discussed with the early areas
I've read a lot of literature talking
about muscles activated in a squat bench
press dead lifts and various movements
and I always think I know some of the
best strongest athletes in the world and
I've asked these guys I'm not one of
them have ever had any studies performed
on them they can tell them the muscles
that they're activating during any of
their movements so I just wanted to get
someone at your level to have a look at
what I'm going to be doing and break
down to tell me am I using quads am I
using glutes how much of my erector
spinae am I using there's a squat and a
deadlift actually work my core muscles
or not this is things that I don't know
yeah my focus in moving a heavy weight
is to safely and efficiently move the
heaviest weight possible from point A to
B and win competitions so it's actually
not as important to me how I look
in terms of aesthetics the six-pack in
the mirror and so on of course that's an
added bonus if it comes but what's
important to me is longevity in the
sport and and as I said winning
competitions moving that way from A to B
so with moving that way from A to B as a
good friend of mine
Ernie Lillibridge senior says with his
squat he's trying to get his ears to
move that movement if it could you're
talking about stability yep
you're basically talking about the thing
that relates to the rehabilitation
person who doesn't lift weights to the
elite athlete it bases around
we all need stability and you're going
to turn on as many muscles as you
possibly can to make yourself like a
pyramid it's basically strong immovable
with a spine we have to do the same
thing we have to turn every muscle that
we can on to create stability so it's
got to be done usually on your feet and
this is how we live our lives so you
know most of the people that we see
doing a rehab scenes with a city on
balls and then lying on their backs
waving arms and legs these things will
not get you strong all you know do is
really end up - making you weak so we
have to be on our feet we hit and they
have to have resistance and yeah we have
to progress that level everything is on
a case-by-case basis and what we got to
look at now is when we look at how you
move we'll understand how this is even
important for the rehabilitation spine
and the principles behind it of the same
turn on everything you can keep yourself
stable mm-hmm and there are some things
you're going to do differently to that
certainly the beginner and why it works
for you and might not work for them and
they got to earn their stripes to get to
your level so I'll tell you getting to
this level just to make it a little bit
clearer there's not a world record
holder by any means in Australia I'm at
a high level and I've got a lot further
to go hopefully but something that I
just heard you say is you know with
stability and turning everything on yeah
you know I talked about tightness and
rigidity of the torso I'm talking about
this from a strength standpoint I'm
trying to hold a heavy bar on my body
and to do that I can't be soft or limp
what's Mike Tyson's roar
and watch that torso it feels like a
barrel of power and everything comes off
that barrel of power so who is a
proximal stability that arrest me we all
will say proximal stability reduces
distal ability mm-hmm you've got to have
this to produce great performance so
what muscle is Mike Tyson using in that
punch everything is in the earth these
elusive feet okay you get with the
planet when you do with that okay good
so this is this is what I want to try
and get down to the bottom of is
something as as I have advanced myself
as a lifter and when I train a novice
lifter is trying to get more and more
muscles on and trying to teach that
person how to use their body you don't
get high tight you don't get hurt
when you're tight under a bar you only
get hurt when you go soft mm-hmm when
you let go when you forget what you're
doing and you drop your head maybe there
is cool tools you shouldn't be doing
that's when you go soft and that's when
you get hurt if you're tight under that
thing you know getting it hurt so this
is what we're trying to do so the
exercises and the techniques that I'll
use to ship the heaviest loads go hand
in hand when teaching somebody had to
stay pain-free or to rehabilitate
themselves or the pic their car keys off
the ground mode okay it doesn't matter
if you're going to pick up 300 kilos off
the ground a lot of the moving patterns
you're gonna use a lot of the techniques
you're going to use a very similar to
the same movement pattern that person
should do when they pick anything up off
the ground mhm
so we are look at those are some basic
things and they're how you get smooth
hey you're back moves hair everything
holds together so you've said they're
lifts and I like that and it brings me
back to a thought that I've had about
you the very first time I met you you
were working in this gym and you're
treating your patients from start of the
day all the way back to back till the
end of the day and we have a treatment
room here in base gym and it's quite
interesting we've got you know
everything set up we've got a nice
massage table we've got everything that
that area needed except that well he was
spending the whole day out here with
barbells and one of the most common
things that I saw you doing was actually
dead lifting with all of your patients
yeah
they're pretty much all at the point
that those ones need to learn how to
move a bar off the ground mm-hmm and all
of them could which is great so a common
misconception with deadlifts is
something that I hear from physios that
I'd rather not work with this is when
they tell their patients to stop their
lifting or oversee you it's sensible to
fear what you don't understand and if
you don't know how to deadlift don't
tell people to deadlift because you
don't know what you're doing in the
first place you know if a doc says to
you ask what's bad for your knees you
know say front squats sumo squat Ali
peak squat power squat
high bus what low bar spot which one doc
which one's the problem well if you
can't explain you which one of those is
the problem he probably does know it at
squat either
so then you gotta find doc he does
definitely so that leads me to one of
the questions that I wanted to ask you
there are so many myths that are going
around with strength training yeah you
know like you said this is only coming
from doctors that don't know how to
prescribe the exercise so they stay away
from it yeah but is this squad actually
bad for your knees there's a human
movement people what's what people do
you we tend to even state that you know
in the third world you tend to find as
less than these surgeries or knee
replacements in it replacing those
places and you were getting the first
world because those people are putting
their bodies through their full range of
movement they're squatting they're
getting down at the full range of
movement and they're doing it since
they're kids and they're doing it
through to adulthood we stop we start
sitting in chairs too often we reduce
our movements and then we find that
we've lost those movements so this is
where we get our movements back so
sometimes you know you don't start
person with a hundred kilos in the back
yeah so may year there's a bodyweight
squat until you actually move you got to
reteach your movement pattern of the
person is lost
mm-hmm so so being a very functional
movement it's what we're designed to do
are we designed to squat 300 or 400 or
more recently where they've just broken
to 500 kilos squat area is that
something that is bad for your knees Oh
certainly not for those people
there comes a point I think mechanically
that if you would load yourselves
spectacularly over decades that will
some structures be able to adapt to that
somewhat mm-hmm but realistically we
look at spines we say that spines
actually get stronger over the years of
weight training the eminent professor
mcgill talks about the fact they used to
get spines from one of the correctional
facilities that people been lifting for
50 years and that their spines had
basically become like whale bone they
were really solid strongly in place that
actually almost calcified mmm because
the constant loads risen so the bones
adapted to the loading mm-hmm that's
what a body will do this is one of the
things whoa we say
strength trains what the body needs to
get better with because the simple
principle science specific adaptation to
an imposed demand and if you learn
you're back in your like waking arms
around and your legs around where you're
sitting on a bouncy ball
what adaptation is they're kind of
placed on you there's going to produce a
rehab spine can't call one it's not go
much not in my world anyway so a squat
fantastic movement it will create health
oh I say you should put every joint in
your human body through its full range
of motion at least once a day and that
will stop the rust getting in there so
something you know the alarm bells raise
when you when you say that it's
something that I definitely a
cooperative or of not doing it's taking
certain joints through their full range
of motion I guess it's a little bit
about laziness but you know you were
showing me some of the exercises earlier
today to prevent shoulder pain and back
pain and and to help me in my squat
we're gonna talk a little bit about that
today sure yeah something that I'm going
to go through some of the questions
right now that I've had on my mind yeah
that I know certain things can hurt or
can be good or bad but I may not have
the exact science behind it and that's
what I'm gonna hopefully have you help
explain yeah so something that I I am
probably the number one question or that
I'm one thing that I see raised when
regarding deadlifts yeah is lifting
heavy barbell off the ground
while the spine is flexed yeah well this
is also known as round back dead lifting
sure now I wanted to know what your
opinion of this was is it bad for you is
it good for is that strong is a weak how
would we teach someone how to deadlift
it comes off the principle saying
there's no such thing as a bad exercise
there's only the wrong exercise at the
wrong time so the flex spine lift is an
appropriate thing for an athlete who is
at a certain stage of rehabilitation
where they can use that use that or they
going to have to be rehabbed into it
because their skill will require it you
will never set a conventional world
record in deadlift with neutral spine it
won't happen also it's not actually
mechanically correct to do so
so actually Paul I might get to grab the
arm spine Prince out there for me always
check this one through so one of the
great things about this is when you just
like to becoming a Formula One driver oh
I say that if you're going to put a
learner driver into a Formula One car
that kids going to crash straightaway
and can't handle the power doesn't know
how it works
thanks well this is super Paul here
thank you our basic gym so in a neutral
spine we find that the joints are taking
a fair bit of the weight as well as the
front the discs and the bones now in the
neutral spine you're sharing the weight
there
but the biggest surfaces are take the
weight bearing of the vertebral bodies
and the discs so if you're going to set
a world record and you've trained for it
does the most thing don't get anyone try
and break a world record on the first
you're trying they can't you actually
have to unload the joints the facet
joints there you have to come into a
position of flexion so a hundred percent
of the weight bearing will come through
the spinal column there that's the
structure which will take the weight
best these little joints back here and
not going to appreciate having a couple
hundred kilos running through them so
that's not a great idea that's why the
position of flat back evening squat is
an acceptable thing an important thing
when the weight gets really high so it's
safer for the elite athlete to be in
that position so that's when flex spines
appropriate okay now the person who's
got a back problem I'm not gonna do that
with they've got to get out of the back
problem and then we're talking about
before
almonds so remember we're talking
rehabbing performance so rehab I'm gonna
teach you to hold your neutral spine get
you to figure out how you know what
that's like get you good at it
then once you go to that and it's gonna
take months if not a year then you have
learn how to control deflection and if
you want to be a strongman how you're
gonna pick an Atlas stone off the ground
without lumber flexion it's not gonna
happen your body's gonna contour to the
stone now human bodies will not go to
Rangers in normal movements that they
don't have mmm so you spine does flex in
fact in the evolution it wants to flex
because it wants to conserve energy and
body and power we tend to lock in the
muscles to move this so there's a lot of
I suppose a lot of discussion around
this about how the human body actually
naturally does flexed anyway from the
spine but that now in a 21st century
situation is a bad thing for most people
who are sitting in posterior pelvic tilt
none that anterior pelvic tilt rubbish
place if I seen like this and posterior
pelvic tilt and then they go to the gym
and they try side to do it I max at a
deadlifts and after they've been sitting
like this
well the disc materials now move
backwards that they're in danger it's
the perfect storm setup so there's so
many things that we can discuss but yes
for elite athletes flex spine is where
they going to go to with often the squat
and the deadlift so when you say an
elite athlete what makes the elite
athlete different to a novice lifter
when you're talking about why do they
qualify that they're allowed to lift
with a flex spine
competitor and obviously well I guess so
the important thing about novice lifters
they also have coaches you've got a
respect weight training the same way you
respect if you want to play tennis at
the Australian Open Wimbledon you want
to play top-level golf you need a coach
now do you expect to play in the
Australian Open first time pick up a
tennis racquet every year no chance
why people going out in the gym and say
okay let's see how much I can lift
without heavy coaching it just doesn't
make any sense so reasonably we must
respect and find great coaches because
there's a difference between being
coached and be properly coached there's
a lot of people out there one of you
coaches but they're not great coaches
they haven't paid their dues like we
have in the gym over years and years to
become a good
so the important thing is for a person
who wants to become strong and powerful
you've got to find someone who actually
is experienced in getting people
straight out of here
yeah and take it to the top level so
back to the round back dead lifting or
or loading your spine under flexion is
there a limit that we have when loading
the spine under flexion without flex can
that spine get it will must depend on
that every individuals biomechanics so
Afghans are fend upon the hip socket
depth that's going to depend upon the
way they're stable on faces it's gonna
depend upon you know their own spinal
makeup so it's gonna depend on case by
case basis and once again that's where
the great coach comes in so there's no
recipe it's got to be under the eye of
the right coach and saying okay we've
tested you this is how you look this is
what's going to be best for you because
you know identity for example you may
have what we will say is the optimal
position for that person to achieve by
me clinically perfect but they can't use
that because they can't function there
yet they've got the strength of the
glutes so they haven't at the strength
of the extensors so you're going to put
them in what we call now the optimal
position what can they recruit well to
perform the lift well and eventually we
aim is to get them to their optimal
position so we're gonna make em function
first so functional training as in where
the body can be strong use what they got
using gifts but we're going to
accessorize to get into optimal body
position okay that works with sumo more
than anything I can take a person into
perfect soon our position but they can't
hold it their abductors all scream the
glute me it's kind of hold the position
okay we'll bring them in until I can
hold that position take six months then
we're moving a couple centimeters there
it's a long ball game you know we're in
this for the years it's not gonna happen
overnight so something else about the
deadlift a lot of the times I'll start
someone in neutral spine there's a lot
more there and we're going to go into
this when I deadlift and we're gonna get
Andrea's going to talk about what I'm
actually doing and it's not just about
the spine and it's not just about
focusing on whether we're flexed or not
there's a lot of things happening we're
picking the floor but up with our hands
you know there's our foot position head
position shoulder position there's a lot
going on so it's not just about the
spine
and and we will cover that because often
all your people coming and say oh I
can't squawks I've got poor ankle
mobility mm-hm and they don't wanna be
powerlessness I say what do you need any
ability if you're a power lifter
reasonably nineteen optional paralysis
needs zero ankle mobility because
they're going to want to have a 90
degree tibia to the floor anyway it
doesn't need to move forward it
shouldn't move forward yeah on 19 I'm
soon pill but you always gonna find
someone who's moving does come forward
and it's appropriate for them and that's
their personal biomechanics but we we're
not Olympic lifters then Olympic lifters
need ankle mobility here they're not
going to get to the ground and get there
but between their heels unless you've
got ankle mobility so one thing is its
what does that person require to perform
their sport so we're training talking
the squat especially today powerlifting
style yep we're not going to be doing
Olympic squats today but I probably
wouldn't be able to if I try so that's
something that my mobility doesn't allow
me to get in the perfect position of an
Olympic lifter that's right so their
requirements is they've got different
mobility requirements to us mm-hm
so back to the squats of the deadlifts
yeah
core activation how much abdominal
musculature were using to perform a
squat in the deadlift
well once again that's a beauty because
there are people who are going to be
activating they're people who are going
not activate them enough all over mm-hmm
so there are some uneducated coaches who
will tend to say the words I only need
to damage and squat my abs yeah maybe
you do but 99% your clients they need to
do ab work to get to be able to use that
and I'd say even beyond that if you want
success you'd need to do specific core
AB training you've got to be out of
plank you got to be our side plank
you've got to be able to involve all
layers of your abs and if you learn how
to use that corset you're probably gonna
be a better lift you might be satisfied
with the fact that you're breaking a few
records but you could probably be better
so you talk about planks so these are
isometric holds yes I'm doing we squat
correct correct sir
I know that you talked about dr. stuart
mcgill a lot yeah and i've read some
literature of his where he talks about
some assessments that he does
where the it's you know front plank side
plank and even holding a horizontal and
a back extension machine yeah for a
period of time lumber endurance is one
of the biggest factors we have in back
problems poor lumber endurance is one of
the predictors of future back injury
do you have an assessment tool that you
would use to predict if someone has the
right lumbering Giants probably would
actually often relate that to the sport
they're doing yeah so if I got an MMA
fighter I might to use a tool that's
actually gonna relate to what they're
gonna do right if I got a pallet wing I
might use a different tool for that one
so it becomes very sport specific not a
one-size-fits-all approach then know
whatever comes from the door I got to
figure out what it takes for them to do
what they do
yeah so I get them to sometimes show me
what you do yeah
and when I see what they do okay now I
know what I've got to do with that to
get you better okay so you know if
they've got lateral stability issues
that they need to have we're gonna work
a lot of lateral stability most our work
is forward backward stability okay
that's good but you know if you come
earlier forward-backward knew your uncle
that or we better be able to hold it
mm-hmm you know if the bar shifts or
something happens what's gonna happen
something when your cue ills are loaded
well they should be able to hold it so
we need stability for me everything so
all the lumber musculature so I'm pretty
sure I know the answer to this question
and how that you're talking about it's a
case-by-case basis but are there any
core exercises that you would consider
your go-to or your favorite core
exercises for building abdominal
strength well I'd love to see the
humility that comes with people who have
to plank for the first time over years
and they're good lifters and they know
they have a nice thing like it and you
suddenly see them hitting your plank and
thirty seconds in there shaking
everything mm-hmm and you just know that
they're getting by without doing the
isometric all work so yeah I say you got
to get your plates
there's a famous curl like which we do
which is a nice abdominal movement as
well but I love the Turkish getup mm-hmm
I think if you can work to get up in
that's one of the greatest ones of all
because you can add resistance to that
get up you can do one either hand you
want so I'll turn do you get up your
variations quite often as a progression
and not doing the full get up I'm just
going to do the abdominal component
right on the ground
add component
component I only snow there and it's up
standing up that's just the skill that's
thanks part if you hell up that in your
sport we'll do the stand-up component
yeah but if you got weak gluts I might
just get you to the bridge component
stay in the brief so they get up for me
is a rehab thing you just break down
side this component is yours yeah we
don't need to get to stand all the way
up if you don't do that in your sport M
so moving forward from the squat and the
deadlift upper body yeah so my favorite
exercise is about mistake
everyone's low is the bench press it's
the first question that you're asked
when you identify that you're a trainee
in the gym yeah what are you what are
you bench so what are your thoughts on a
bench for shoulder health now before you
talk about your opinion I use my
powerlifting style bench press with an
arch yeah to protect my shoulders and
amongst general population they'd look
at it and the first thing they're not
going to look at my shoulders they're
gonna look at the the arch position that
I'm using so before we talk about the
shoulder health we know what my go-to
exercises can you please tell me your
opinion on my arch and a benchpress it's
interesting when you bring that in the
context we've been talking about flex
lumbar spines
everyone's going how do you go stay
neutral upper spine and you've got to
get the arch and keep that arch there
but something you put into a benchpress
anyone says don't do that well that's
happening why are you suddenly changing
your opinion about this thing that
you're telling me I've got to hold this
position here I'm not sighs to hologram
be on a bench so the interesting thought
is the arch is very protective of that
lumbar spine now of course if you've got
an injury at that time it's a different
situation because you might not handle
the compression that is produced by
Gradney arch if you're healthy
the compression stabilizing you so we're
talking about healthy people don't so
the arch as I said if you go anywhere in
the world in the ancient world in Europe
you can always tell where the ancient
Greek cultures been because there's lots
of straight lines and lots of columns
because you can't have columns far apart
with a straight line or a falls apart
you get the Romans the Romans brought
the arch in which means you can bring
the load a lot wider apart many of the
dome with the arch we're doing the same
thing it becomes more stable the more
pressure you put onto your arch so if
you get that actually
nice and great you're putting a lot of
pressure do it the arts creates more
stability fear to be able to press from
so a stable art major thing it's a lot
of activations a lot of lats in there
because the lattice our lumber extensor
if you do it correctly if you're looking
from your shoulders we clean Gleaners
from you bring your basically your brain
was now an origin to insertion
contraction rather than insertion to
origin contraction and they'll give you
a stability that's happening there so
yeah the art itself in adventurous
incredibly protective now it does load
up the facet joints but not
spectacularly and in the right person at
the right time they're super safe so the
general rule is the arch is going to be
the best protective thing you will do
and it will help you transmit the forces
that you'll then be our bench weather
with mm-hmm so that's great that's
that's kind of not along the exact same
lines and probably not as intelligently
explained as yourself but it's
definitely a protective mechanism for
myself but mainly for my shoulders so
why I believe the arch is it puts my my
whole spine into an extension position
which assists me in retracting my
scapula which positions our scapula in
the right angle to move a heavy barbell
so interesting thoughtfulness is we're
actually going to be using the lats a
lot of the time to create the arch so
there's strange people out there some of
you even have PhDs who say oh you don't
use your legs from your bench press
I reckon now it's got a homeschooling
ph.d for that one it just doesn't make
sense because we have agonists and
antagonists if you just contract your
bicep the tricep isn't relaxing it's
activating to keep the joint stable so
when you're pressing yes you're using
your pecs and your front delt in your
triceps put your posterior delts
activating your lats are activating your
rotator cuff dividing everything is Co
activating we're turning on now in the
novice they're not aware of those
muscles activate and they're working
very much on their primary pushes their
agonist
but on an elite on a per film who's
trained a lot they use a co activation
strategy you'll turn your lats on
because you're going to increase your
stability so you co contracted which is
a skill that's a crossover
regarding shoulder health you
so my primary objective is to benchpress
the biggest way possible for competition
I think it's everybody's goal and dream
on even if you're not competitive
it's still another big benchpress yep
but in order to do that I believe that I
need to have healthy shoulder joints and
I need to be pain-free yeah to be able
to get that bench press number up as
high as possible now what I do my
approach is to within my programming is
to structure the programming so there's
a push-pull ratio of 1 to 1 yeah and
I'll add in some external rotators my
rationale to this is my pushing muscles
which picks internal rotators of the
shoulder joint yeah my main pulling
muscles in my lats are also internal
rotators of the shoulder joint yeah so
I've been brought up in the belief that
creating a structurally balanced
physique is very good for joint health
and it is and that's a fantastic
approach wonder one is pretty much the
same routine that I've developed as well
and we independent each other we're kind
of well we've seen now says you want to
be basically functional without getting
injuries you've got to go one to one so
I you just have that one client for
every bench you do you've got to do a
pull mm-hmm every push that's our pull
just like your 1 to 1 ratio
yep and then you're right your target
intellectually ok strong internal
rotators got a balance how we find our
external rotators we're going to include
those as well great so what do you go to
external rotation exercises or I should
say exercises to train your external
rotators I've developed an interesting
concept where I've moved away from doing
the external rotation movements which
have been dominated forever because
that's mostly someone grabbing in every
book and going this is what it does
right now look and say external rotators
are holding basically in this position
there buddy acting in almost an
isometric fashion so what I do is I use
a movement where I externally rotate the
arm and I extend so the army is
externally rotated and I'm bringing into
an extension movement mm-hmm that's far
more translatable to then they're
pushing the opposite movement okay I
like that exercise I'm gonna definitely
include that in my training you'll enjoy
that one and I have been a culprit of
actually
you know externally rotating my shoulder
joints what everyone was thought yeah
yeah okay good thank you answering that
question now there's one more I wanted
to speak about I got a check a little
bit but I want to go back to the squat
again yeah now something that I'm asked
a lot about and for myself I had a rule
it was about butt wink yeah so for those
who are not aware of what Bart link is
it's basically when the pelvis at the
bottom end of the squat it goes into
posterior pelvic tilt and potentially if
the lack of control and they've done the
muscles maybe you can break that down
what it what are your thoughts on butt
wink is it bad is it acceptable it
shouldn't happen until it is
structurally necessary for it to happen
so if a person has deep hip sockets
for example they're going to get to a
position where they can no longer hold a
neutral spine into the squat and their
back is going to flex to take them
further you can't negotiate it whether
they're just running to their
biomechanical limitation but the person
who but weeks before the biomechanical
limitation is showing weakness so we
examine that we look and say I check a
person's movement see where they're
perhaps but winking if they do and then
we can test it out to see whether they
can hold that if we produce a different
movement now we can do a lot of
anatomical tests and determine what a
person's hip structures like so yeah
with the but weak it's is it you can the
person achieve that height in that
position with a neutral spine in any
other position safer can they sit
straight like this
in a neutral spine well if they can they
can probably a squat in this position as
well so if they're slumping and hitting
this into that week at before 90 and yet
they can sit like this at 90 it probably
tells us that they've got a functional
weakness so that's why it's not about
how year I'm dead lifting is going to
make my ABS work that's that person who
needs to actually translate an abdominal
movement to a performance art so I am a
person who says sometimes you gotta
isolate to get a person to understand
what you're dealing are slight then
integration so this is important like we
will decry the isolation well
although I know their muscles so you do
need to isolate that make them feel it
mmm because they don't know what the
muscles are they haven't probably the
University who spent a lot of time
finding what a muscle actually is and
somebody have any professionals seem to
forget after their exams what those
muscles are so it's really important to
help a person find that muscle with an
isolation movement and then say okay
we're going to integrate that now into
your pitch or example getting the lats
to activate so your arch is stable all
those sorts of things yeah so all the
cues that you might use with a lifter
you're using them to integrate an
activation so something interesting you
spoke about so when I asked you the
question is but wink acceptable what is
it acceptable so comparing so so the
reason why the main reason why people
would steer away from butt wink is
because it forces a spiral spine into
flexion yeah under load yep
is that a bad thing now there's the
perfect point is is that a bad thing
classic word is it depends hmm so you
must learn how to control flexion so
yeah a flex lumbar spine can be stronger
but if you can't control it it's
dangerous that's your Formula One car
don't see the kid into a Formula One car
if they can't drive it okay you get your
old place you get your P place you get
on the road you spend some time you pay
your dues then you're gonna go to race
school now the same thing happens in
parallel you got to respect Palestine
you must learn to hold flexion not just
go there no one can just go there and
say yeah it looks like summers flying
that anatomically is correct if you want
yeah but every time this turbo off the
ground I start bending more you can't
control it so I have a rule if you can't
control it you can't lift it mm-hmm
I only control what you can lift okay so
I like that thought that so if you're
picking up a deadlift bar and you start
in flexion you know if you can't control
that flexion what will happen you're
going to flex you're going to have us
well most likely the injury comes from a
segmental
movement so just even one degree is
enough to create a disc injury so you've
got to be so good there's only one
degree of flexion of that spine it's
gonna hold strong in either neutral or
flexion depending how experienced the
person is so it is it's it's driving a
Formula One car at the top level you
watch it when that bar leaves the ground
stop frame
watch all the best the back might be
flexed but it never flexes a millimeter
further mm-hmm but you watch all the
YouTube videos of people getting injured
watch the bar stop it when the bars
Bertha leave the ground watch the next
step up okay and that's where the forum
breakdown comes so the spine will then
flex like a fishing rod yep and that's
where there's danger that's where
there's big danger that's where the
surgeons will make the money but under
control you'll see a flex spine only
into extension and you'll stand up and
live code you with the world
championships and they able to set your
world record and in a butt wink they're
trying to hold neutral and they're
getting forced into flexion
that's uncontrolled flexion yeah and
that is dangerous that is dangerous yet
movement under load is dangerous okay so
we always call it a moment time it means
that physically it's hild movement is
the problem moment is not so that's what
it's like the fishing rod or the crane
you've got to be the crane not the bendy
fishing rod okay I like these analogies
that using are very helpful what I'm
going to do now is they go let's try and
put it into practice
you vote so what I'll start with in a
pallet in competition we start with a
squat yes so you can probably see I got
my gear ready to go I thought you're
sleeping lives I do sometimes
and we're gonna get you to break down
what I'm doing and why it's effective
yeah and if it's safe or if it's not
let's see all right let's do it
time for talking over in time for action
to begin so Sebastian is you know
demonstrate his squat technique which is
why he works so let's see what's the
best it does when he gets under about
that's better than King the bar low bar
low bar means closest to his axis of
rotation decreases the distance
increases load ability steps back sets
up a stable base with his feet toes
pointing where they want to point drives
the knees over the toes fire lines
perfect upper body stable the breathing
the tense and tension of the ABS like a
barrel brilliant
so like a strong building built from the
ground up strong foot position driving
the hips back
big brace arm position where his
mobility currently allows him to be
strong and close resting the bar on his
rear delts bring you to low bar not high
bar because it brings us closer to the
axis of rotation all the thing it takes
to produce a strong lift
thank you onto the next set now
Sebastian and I expect what we will see
is mostly a carbon copy of the previous
sets we should see technicals identical
as we move between wood sets you can see
someone who's performed thousands
thousands of reps basically look the
same just with more weight let's have a
look at Sebastian once again sitting up
there nice low bar position getting the
feet nice and stable fourth on the lift
out arm positions good all right foot
position perfectly set brace ready ABS
putting onto the belt now wearing the
belt head position looking straight
ahead not moving your millimetre up so
it's bringing that extensive tightness
beautiful working that belt so the brace
is now increased and the stability
increased by the belt
great work look good well we know this
is my bench press setup so a lot of
people are different with this this is
what I prefer high so I prefer a wide
grip bench press not everyone does but
like you were discussing before a lot of
times when I'm training somebody to go
wide will start in narrower and
gradually gradually strengthen the joint
so it can handle yep you work with what
you got
and you know going wider as well of
course reduces range of motion which my
goal in that Palestine competition is
just to move the heaviest load possible
that's what we're here for so check it
out you should slow it back the reason I
slide back is so that I can get my feet
back far enough if I start here I can't
give them back far enough so I slide
back some of my hands off the bench
bring my feet back from this position I
Drive my heels down which extends my hip
joint
extension of the hip joint will also
extend my whole spine
so I'm driving my heels down as I'm
sliding into position extension of my
spine helps me retract scapula and then
I'll want to create that beautiful arch
so you can see that the stability is
credited by the is't Sebastian is put
from his toes all the way with others so
in arch as we know he's a much more
stable structure than the flat back
position the small stabled is the more
tension he's able to produce on this
thing the more tension Sebastian
producers the greater the weight that's
going to be moved with what he's got so
he's created this fantastic base it's
just like a very solid pyramid toes hips
shoulders retraction using the last to
get the shoulder blades down so he's got
not easy pressing with his agonist
muscles but he's antagonists are Co
contracting it's an elite skill knowing
how to turn on opposing muscle groups
for stability and then the press is
coming off this awesome stable base and
that's all we're doing nice wide grip
decrease in the distance moves so dokie
happy with my arch I love that art I
didn't ruin my back just sin
well you saved it great news keep it up
progression is gonna form just another
set for everyone to be able to see how
he sets himself up does he think sliding
his body up first forward so he can get
his feet nicely back underneath him so
he's getting on the ball whose foot
initially to start to set the arch bring
the shoulder blades down to a new cloth
first so I can get his position after
that ok driving the heels in creating
that beautiful arch the latter on horses
their perfect grip bars moving exactly
in the line these were creating its best
powerful force from so these traps
also Co contracting with those last so
everything's stable there those triceps
are pushing the front delts doing the
major drive the pecs involved everything
is working like super new Orchestra and
that's how it looks there's no leakage
of energy anywhere you don't see any
wobbling it's all concentrated on the
production of a bench press
this is my deadlift I walk up to the bus
of machines of touching the bar my
stance is where I would stand if I was
to jump as high as I could
my hands will then be placed outside of
my legs allowing enough room for my
needs to push slightly outwards against
the inside of my locked elbows making
sure my elbows remain locked throughout
the entire movement grabbing the bar
I'll usually mix acute for this I bring
my bum down bending into position just
enough so I can add quadriceps
recruitment to this movement but not so
much that my tibia will move forward in
the way of the bar path I want my shins
out of the way of the bar I pull my
shoulder blades into my back pockets
hold my breath pushing the world away
drop run down knees out push the world
away drop down knees out push the world
away that's how it's done
time for another sensation right the
plan is always look where Sebastian's
feet eyes he said previously it's the
same position he would use as if he was
trying to produce the greatest sporty
vertical leap he could do so as
especially hilf said before he is
pushing the world away so is producing
as we would say Newton's third law for
every action there's an equal and
opposite reaction
he's pushing the ground with perfectly
stable feet position and it will produce
the best vertical lift we can produce so
it's Vaseline into the lift putting his
hands outside of his knees his knees
slightly touching the top four arms and
away he goes now what we did there is
produced a little bit of stability by
doing that locking the lats in by using
the accuser pulling those shoulders down
great hip production this is all coming
through beautifully vertical tibia
position strong back position as base
leaders producing as you say a flexion
moment not a flexion movement great
strengths of Lummis fly and stabilizing
it's all there so people often ask me
about jealousy what weights are they use
it's actually very very relative my
expectations when I'm working with
spinal rehab work is I'm looking at
people
we've got to the deadlift situation
about 50% of body weight to a hundred
percent of body weight is for me the
rehab stage so we're doing rehab work
when we're working with half a body
weight to body weight lifting once we
get to body weight training time begins
and we're talking about train for me as
normal healthy person should go from
either body weight to double body weight
that's my expectation of what a good
healthy person should be achieving now
if you're going beyond double body
weight you're talking about looking at a
competitive environment so safe training
under the right coaches I expect people
to working in body weight to double body
weight safely and good coaching this
will be a safe endeavor and it is
producing great spine health by holding
this flexion moment arm creating a
weight that you can hold safely and
correctly now sebastian's you know take
us and show us what good performance is
all about it's a nice foot position once
again producing the best sport you can
and in the mixed grip aim for the
virtual shin and driving out through the
hips some of the muffled talk apparently
coming through those glutes whole spine
and I'm the Gosha ball position locking
brilliantly and safely all the way
through disease with - thanks doc so
that's a wrap a great day with without
you luck thank you so much for coming
really appreciate an expert's scientific
opinion on online movement kind of
validating some of the things right I'm
doing correctly and also pointing out
some of the things behind the scenes I
just climbed enough not to do it in
front of the camera
that could be improved on there's always
room for improvement so I really
appreciate that hopefully we answered a
few of your questions today perhaps we
debunked a few myths that are going
around thank you so much and it's great
to be working with Russians and the
basic message was really
strength is the is the mage thing we're
working for our strength is the thing
that will prevent most of the injuries
of people get that were preventable you
know whether it's weakness of will or
whether it's weakness of body they're
preventable things the people work for
it health will come so whether I'm
rehabbing a person to come out of injury
strength is going to be a key and if
you've got a lifestyle strength is
always going to help you it's going to
be the thing that prevents you from
having interference to that lifestyle so
strengths trying to use light and
movement patterns a life from Betty and
moving patterns the better is going to
live but if you do that goals are you
having like whether it's sport family
whatever it takes so these are the basic
lifts that we always are using in gyms
and these basic lifts other things are
really the things we need great coaching
on so it's great to see you do your work
things I don't use fantastic but thanks
so much and if we did need some more
coaching from you where is it that these
guys I'm sure they've got some questions
they want answered directly by you where
can I find you he usually just googling
one name you'll find articles I've
written Facebook you'll find functional
strength rehabilitations where I work
from and yeah we look forward to
catching up and producing some more work
Sebastian likewise okay here
thank you guys